Precedence in java is—operations are performed from left to right with parentheses taken into account.

## Expression and Statement
An expression is a combination of values that is tuned into another value via calculation or evaluation.

Evaluations are always performed before its values are assigned to a variable.

## Calculating and Printing
if one of the operands of the operation + is a string the operand is converted to a string too during program execution. Precedence, obviously, also apply’s to printing in java.
```java
public class Example {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		System.out.println("Four: " + (2 + 2));
		System.out.println("But! Twenty-two: " + 2 + 2);
	}
}
```
Output —> 
```
Four: 4
But! Twenty-two: 22
```
Here—we notice that precedence comes into play. In the first output, the integers were first evaluated inside the parentheses before being converted into a string by the + operator while in the second output, the integers were immediately converted into strings.

the underlying logic for all this, which has been stated before, is that: evaluating a string with a + operator and a number will result to said number being converted to a string to make evaluation possible.

## Division
Divisions of integers are a slightly trickier operation. Below are rules guiding division in java.
1. if all the operands in the division operation are integers the result will be an integer as well
2. if the dividend or the divisor or both of the division operation is a floating point number the result will be a floating point number as well. this also works for other
3. an integer can be converted to a floating point number by placing a type casting operation `(double)`before it 