a variable can be thought of as a container where information of the given type can be stored.

variables are declared via:
```java
int number = 2;
```

### Note 1
1. declaring a variable with the same name will cause compilation errors
2. variable names must be unique in java to avoid referencing collisions.
3. variable values can be joined to a string using the + operator
## Variable Type persists
once a variable types has been declared, it can no longer be changed. example boolean values cannot be assigned to an integer variable.

However there are exceptions to this:
1. integers can be assigned to double types—because java can handle integer to double conversion types.
2. floating point values cannot however be assigned to an integer variable. This is to prevent loss of information.

## Naming Variables
1. Java uses camelCase paradigm
2. one can assign variable names that include numbers as long as the number does not begin the name
3. variable names already in used cannot be reused.

## Reading Different Variable Types from User
User inputs are always read as strings. so in order to retrieve variable types that are not character based from the user some methods are used to convert them to the required type.

### Integers
conversion of string to integer is done via:
```java
int value = Integer.valueOf(valueOfString);
```
### Doubles
conversion of string to double is done via:
```java
double value = Double.valueOf(ValueAsString);
```

### Booleans
Conversion of string to boolean type is done via:
```java
boolean value = Boolean.valueOf(valueAsString)
```
Here all strings that are not `"true`” are regarded as FALSE while only the string `"true"` itself is regarded as TRUE. The function is case insensitive to any character in the user inputs—so no matter how the user inputs `“true”` as long as it spells true it will be regarded as TRUE.